Mutability

In Mutability, Percy Bysshe Shelly argues that change is the only constant. Nothing in nature, the things we create, or ourselves are permanent. He argues from the external to the internal that nothing endures. The only thing we can expect is change, so change is the only constant.

The poem is written in iambic pentameter with every other line rhyming to create a constant rhythm. Iambic’s neutral and regular rhythm was commonly chosen for philosophical arguments (Nelson). The meter’s regularity contradicts the theme that everything changes, yet it also reinforces the statement that only mutability endures. The poem is composed of four four-line stanzas that move from the external nature to the internal thoughts that we experience.

Shelley uses similes to liken people and life to clouds and lyres. Paradoxes are used to reinforce the main theme that change is the only this that endures. The poet uses conflicting emotions like “joy or sorrow” and sleep and wakefulness to show that we are always changing. Alliteration adds emphasis to the imagery as well as a lyrical quality. Assonance decorates the iambic rhythm and ties points from one argument to the next.

The first stanza argues we are like nature, always changing: “We are as clouds that veil the midnight moon”. Shelley uses alliteration “midnight moon” to emphasise our fleeting activities are shorter than the moment of the moon at midnight. Our lives as clouds are described as “restless”, “speed”, and “gleam”, because our activity stands out against the momentary constant of a midnight moon. Midnight passes to the night and our cloudy lives are “lost forever”. In the context of time, day and night, our lives are brief.

The second stanza argues neither our lives nor our creations are permanent. “Or like forgotten lyres whose dissonant strings / Give various response to each varying blast” The musical instrument is already in the past. The strings are no longer in tune. They never play the same note. The poet selected words to liken the lyre to our lives: “To whose frail frame no second motion brings/One mood or modulation like the last” The poet uses alliteration to liken the harp’s “frail frame” is like our aging bodies in “motion”. He gives it feeling by describing a note as a “mood or modulation”.  Shelley reinforces the connection of living and feeling with alliteration of “motion” and “modulation”.

In the third stanza, Shelly argues that we cannot ever control our inner thoughts: “We rest—a dream  has power to poison sleep / We rise—one wandering thought pollutes the day” Bad thoughts constantly impose themselves. We cannot stop them from crossing our mind because they have “power”,  are “poison” and “pollute”. Alliteration strengthens the impact of the words. Yet, everything we think, feel, or imagine is transient. The poet illustrates our conflicting and changing emotions, we “laugh or weep”, “fond woes”, and “cast our cares away”. Assonance is used to tie the first example to the last, while alliteration ties the first to the second.

The final stanza, Shelley declares “It is the same!—For, be it joy or sorrow / The path of its departure still is free” All our feelings are the same because they are momentary. We cannot stop our thoughts from changing. We cannot remain joyful, and we might be comforted that sorrow will pass. Because there is no permanence, we are vulnerable to nature, time, and our own feelings. The days of our life are never the same: “Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow”.

Shelley concludes the last stanza with “Nought may endure but Mutability”.  A simple statement made striking the change in meter from iambic to trochee (Nelson); at last the rhythm mutates. He accepts his observation as truth. He does not offer advice to accept change. There is no judgment, good or bad, that nothing, not nature, our creations, our joys, nor our sorrows will endure.
